Okay, hello everybody. My name is Gabe Osterhout. I'm the data viz guy for the
Idaho Secretary of State. So as my title suggests, I work for the Secretary of
State, like him himself, and by his title he's the chief election official for the
state of Idaho. So we have many roles in our office that we provide to the state,
but one of those is on election night, you know, when you're getting your results
from CNN, the New York Times, if you're going to the state's direct website, you
know, we're the ones who aggregate that data. So usually when you vote, at least
in a state like Idaho, the county administers the election, kind of at the
precinct of the polling place, they report the results to the county and the
county's reporting it to us. So on election night, we're the ones
responsible for aggregating that information and then publishing it so
the public can see it and then the media can grab that data as well. So we tried
something new for the 2024 elections where we used R & Quarto for that
process. Remember the 2020 election? It was not a fun time, you know. I was, we
were not in office during the 2020 election, thankfully, but, you know, my boss
took office in 2023 and my my position actually didn't exist yet. There was no
data visualization person, there was no data analyst person in our office, believe
it or not, but my boss, thankfully, is a data nerd. I don't know how many of you
work for data nerds, but it's very nice to have allies in powerful places, but
this was kind of the world that we took office in, right? There were still a lot
of the the consequences of the 2020 election, a lot of conspiracy theories,
misinformation, you know, valid or not, this was kind of the world we are working
in. So everything election related in my world is extremely scrutinized. So going
into the 2024 election, we have kind of these ghosts of 2020 in our head, right?
Even though we didn't work the election. And so at the beginning of 2024, we
launched this great new voteidaho.gov website. It recently won an award. It was
highly acclaimed at the time. Voters really liked it. It became a one-stop
shop for all kinds of voter information. Check your polling place, view your
sample ballot, and, you know, we thought, hey, this is 2024, we're entering the
cycle, they have all these great resources. Why not also make it a
one-stop shop for election results on election night? So my kind of role in all
of this, obviously, is, all right, so now I'm tasked with improving our election
results for 2024. Can't be that difficult. So my boss, he wanted to kind
of remind me, you know, we have a lot of things going on in the data visualization
world. As we all kind of know, there's competing priorities, there's lots of
questions that are super interesting to me. Now that we've kind of got a bunch of
dashboards and visuals and insight into past elections, since my position never
existed, there's a ton of outside interest in media questions, questions
in the legislature, like, what about this? What about that? And unfortunately, one of
my weaknesses is, well, that sounds really interesting, I want to pursue that
question, too. But we had this real time constraint, right? We're not operating in
a vacuum where we have time to do everything. So, you know, my boss is
worried about me getting distracted, so he put this priority list on my desk.
Election results were the second most important thing I could be working on at
all times. It was also the third most important thing, the fourth most
important thing, and fifth, sixth, and seventh. So it's helpful for me. I just
kind of show you this as a reminder of, all right, this is kind of an
important thing. We can't screw it up, obviously, right, given what happened in
2020. Not that anybody screwed anything up, but it would just kind of, you know,
reinforce those fears people had. Oh, see, you know, there were mistakes. I've been
saying that all along. We really want to avoid that. But it was also helpful when
these requests came out or came into our office. I could just show them, hey, you
know, the boss says focus on election results. So as I'm thinking about ways
to improve our election results, you know, we're looking at what other states are
doing. Now, election night reporting, I'll call it ENR as an acronym, it, you know,
every state does it. It's always been secure. It's always been accurate, as a
lot of us know, but the data visualization part of it for other
states isn't usually something they're focused on. They want to make sure they
get the numbers out there, and they might have a JSON file or our state has
an XML file. The media grabs that, and then the media does the really cool
visualization part. You know, I've gone to the New York Times for my election
results. I've gone to CNN. I'm sure a lot of you have as well, because they have
really cool results, and they have interactive maps. A lot of states don't.
Idaho had never used maps for official election results. You know, being an
election junkie myself, in this current job and previously, I had looked at a lot
of historical results and visualized them and created really fun interactive
maps, but I had never done it, you know, we wanted to incorporate that in the
actual official ones, and obviously we have access in R to all kinds of cool
mapping packages, things that create beautiful tables, and so I wanted to
leverage that expertise, but then also have it update in real time and be a
resource for people on election night. So the only problem with the New York Times,
I already mentioned I'm a data team of one, right? My position never existed
before. I'm about to double my number by bringing in Dr. Andrew Heiss. The only
problem with the New York Times is they have more than one person. I'm sure
that's a huge surprise to hear, but this is 2020. This is just the Idaho election
results page, and if you scroll to the bottom of this page, they credit over 40
people on working on just Idaho's election results, and I didn't know it at
the time, but 2024 obviously is what we're gonna end up competing against.
They had 63 people listed as working on that, which tells me a couple things, but
most importantly, you know, it shows the New York Times was also taking 2024 more
seriously and realizing there's a lot more attention and scrutiny, and that's
just for Idaho, right? Not a lot of people go to New York Times for Idaho's
election results, especially in the presidential. It's usually a
foregone conclusion. Idaho hasn't voted for a Democratic presidential candidate
since 1964. Okay, in terms of timeline, so I've already mentioned it needs to be
perfectly accurate, right? Otherwise, it's January 6th at my house. I already
mentioned, you know, it needs to be visually appealing because we want
people to go to our site, go to the source, rather than just go to, you know,
other organizations, and we want election results that Idahoans can be proud of and
confident in, but there's this other constraint, which is the timeline. So our
NewVoteIdaho.gov website launched in February of 2024. The election's not till
November, so I've got quite a few months to work on this, right? Now, the general
election for our non-U.S. friends, this is the one you always see in the news
where president is up. The only issue is, I keep saying the only issue is, there's
lots of issues here, as you can tell. In Idaho, we have the primary election on
May 21st, and so a primary election is where Democrats face off against
Democrats, Republicans face off against Republicans, and then the ones who win
within their party then go on the ballot for November. The primary election in
Idaho is more important than the November election because the Republicans
and Republican districts are likely to win in November, and the Democrats and
Democratic districts are likely to win in November. So that's where all the
attention is, that's where all the money is. We have a ton of cool campaign
finance data you can go look at to prove that all the money is spent in May,
and there's more eyeballs on May, and unfortunately that is fast approaching
at this point. Another challenge we have is, you know, the New York Times is
showing kind of the nationally relevant races, like President and Congress. We
have to show those and the legislative ones, the ballot measures, and then all
the local stuff, because as the official place to go for election results, we
can't just show the ones that seem interesting. We have to show them all. So
we have over 400 races in May that we have to show, and I mentioned the
accuracy part, right? You can't say 99.9 percent uptime like you guys usually do
in the data science world. You know, if 399 are right and one's wrong, like that
person that's in that race is watching that page and they're gonna notice, and
they're gonna take a screenshot. So our results, they also have to update in real
time. So unlike all the data analysis that a lot of us have done in the room, I
know my experience working with our data, you know, you have a static data set, it
may be super messy, it may be clean, whatever, but it's like static. Or we've
had data that updates daily, but never every few minutes, right? So as the
results are coming in, we can't just wait till the end of the night to show it.
That's also how conspiracy theories start. Where are all the results? So we
we need it to update in real time. So that's kind of the real challenge
at this point, you know, kind of figuring out all these other things. How do we get
it to update in real time? And so I bring on Dr. Andrew Heist, professor at Georgia
State here in Atlanta. A lot of you probably know him from his great blog
posts and YouTube videos. He's just really cool dude, so come talk to him. So
I brought him on. We met 40 days before the primary election. So we're given
these timeline constraints and all the other constraints I've mentioned. We
don't necessarily have time to learn new tools to reincorporate this
workflow. You know, we're really comfortable working in R. If you've used
Cordo, you know it's a great product for publishing your visuals. We wanted to
stay with something that's familiar. So, you know, I'm proud to
report we were able to do this whole project without ever leaving RStudio. We
didn't, you know, we didn't need a separate process for SQL, and we didn't
need a separate process for like publishing the website, and then of
course all the data wrangling and visualization in the middle. We all were
able to do within the R ecosystem. Okay, so I've listed a bunch of challenges. If
you're not freaked out yet, before I turn it over to Andrew to kind of show some
of the cool stuff he figured out for the data pipeline, I just wanted to show you
a quick preview of the final product so you're not sitting there wondering, man,
did these guys actually pull this thing off? I'm not sure they're going to be
able to do it. So this was the November 24 election. This was our most basic page,
which is just the presidential race, but one thing that's, there's a few things
that were really exciting about using Cordo for this project. Having the
different district types at the top for navigation was a huge win for our state,
and a lot of other states, you know, you don't usually don't have that kind of
ease of navigation. You're usually having all the races on one page and having to
scroll through, which is also why people seek out the media who have kind of
thought these things through a little better. You know, having the status bar at
the top to show whether results were official or unofficial. I'm not sure if
you can see it, but there's a call-out block that's in green that says 44 of 44
counties are reported. That updated throughout the night, so every few
minutes as the results are coming in, people were able to use that drop-down,
figure out who's still coming and not, and then once the bar is green, you know
there's not going to be any more results coming in. So real quick, the, you know,
you have kind of the race breakdown here. It's a Reactable, Reactable with a
nice spark bar, and then for every race you have kind of the raw results summed,
like you can see there, and then a tab that has a map. So for every one of the
400 races, there was a map, and we love leaflet maps and they're interactive, and
you know, we know all the exciting things about them, but it was really cool to
have those kind of updating throughout the night. And then another thing that's
great about Cordo, as you guys know, is the table of contents. They were able to
throw on the left, so being able to jump between district without having to
scroll up and down is huge, especially with as many races as we had. Real quick,
so the, you know, leaflet, I learned a really cool thing, and we'll have a repo
at the end where you can check it out, but the tooltips for leaflet, you can
actually use custom HTML within a column and then just call to that for
the pop-up, and so that was able to kind of programmatically regenerate
every time the results came in as well. All right, finally, on the website, this
was something new we did November, not for May, which was really cool. If we had
not done any of the other stuff I showed you, but just did this, we would
have gotten a lot of credit in our state. We created this close races page that
dynamically, every time the site updated, was checking to see which races were
close, as the name implies. You know, what's funny about this is my boss and I,
you know, the Secretary of State being a data nerd as he is, we went back and
forth on what the threshold should be, what's a close race. I looked at some
historical races and I thought, you know, three percentage points would be a great
margin. I thought, you know, a nice balance of not having too many races, but it's not
empty, and he thought, no, it really should be like eight percentage points. We
need a wider net, and so we went back and forth on this, and I, you know, is any
great compromise with your boss? We ended up going with his number, the eight
percentage points, but he was right. If we had gone with my threshold, there
only would have been one race on this page at the end of the night, and we
ended up having about half a dozen, but when we're kind of following the
analytics on election night, this is the page everybody was looking at, which was
really cool, and we got a lot of credit for it. Okay, so before I turn it over to
Andrew, if we're thinking about, you know, like an organization like the New York
Times, where these people are doing really cool stuff. Yeah, they have 63 people, but
they're really kind of divided into three roles. You got the data engineers
that are kind of processing the data and doing the ETL processes. You have the
data analysts that are then taking that data, visualizing it in tables and maps,
getting insights into the election, and then you have your web developer that's
really publishing the website. So those are kind of the three roles that
Andrew and I are seeking to replicate, and I'll let him talk about the data
pipeline component. Yeah, so between the two of us, we had to turn into three
separate teams, which was intense, and we had to do it all really quickly and have
live updating data and all of that, and so what we settled on was creating a
pipeline, two different pipelines that took all of the data and processed it
and then made the maps. For all of you, we've actually made a fake state with
fake elections with fake candidates. If you want to see the process, we have a
whole GitHub repository with this all working, and you can download it and have
your own fake election, and so this QR code will be out at the end as well if
you want to see it, but so the way we did this is we had the ETL to extract,
transform, and load, just getting the data, doing stuff with it. This pipeline had to
run in the Idaho State Capitol, which is tricky for me because I don't live in
Idaho. I live here, and so we will talk about some workarounds we had for that,
but in general, it started by grabbing the most recent results from the
official Idaho State vendor-provided database, and then we had to
clean and process that, make it all work together nicely. To speed up the building
of the website, we pre-built all of those 400 maps and tables and then had to
store those objects as something so that it could then go on to building the
website, which could happen anywhere in the world. It wasn't locked to the state
capitol. It happened to be running in the state capitol, but that wasn't necessary,
so with the website pipeline, we had to grab those objects, build the Quarto site,
and then deploy, and we ended up using Netlify because they're cool, and so with
these pipelines, the way we automated this is we just had them running with
cron jobs, or for the May one, we were the cron jobs because we didn't trust the
computers, but for November, we did have it go kind of on a regular cadence. For
the May one, it was going every 10 to 15-ish minutes, but because of some
really cool performance gains that we'll look at really quick, we were able to
shrink this down to about every 2 minutes 90 seconds is how long it took
to update the website, and so it was just going consistently all throughout
election night, which is really cool. The magic behind all of this is a package
called targets, which you should all be using. It even works with analysis as
packages, as we saw in the first talk here, so you should all use targets, so we
basically, the magic of targets is that you can build that type of workflow here
where you have different objects that are being created, and if anything needs
to update upstream, like if you make a change downstream or upstream, and stuff
has to change later, it's smart enough to know, and so if nothing needs to change,
like if the data doesn't change, then nothing later on needs to rebuild, and so
it goes really quickly, and so it manages dependencies and all sorts of stuff like
that. So what I want to do really quick is just highlight some of the cool
things we had to do to make these pipelines work really efficiently. The
first is getting the data from the database. This was tricky initially
because, again, it had to be in the capital, and I wasn't there, so helping
develop this was hard, and so initially for the May primary, we were just working
with like RDS-based extracts from the database, and then using raw SQL
commands to grab stuff from there. Raw SQL is gross, and so for November, what we
ended up doing was switching to dbplyr, because that's better, and then creating
kind of a mirrored version of the schema of the actual database using all of the
tables they had internally, but with like our own simulated data, just so we
could practice connecting to the real database, and then on election night, we
just had to change one environment variable from like use fake data or fake
database to use real database, and then it worked, and so it was kind of cool and
magical. So we were able to fix that. Another trick was getting these two
pipelines to talk to each other, especially because they were in like
different locations. In the May primary, we saved every one of those objects as
an RDS file, and then using network drives, got it communicating, and that was
fine. In November, though, targets can actually write to Amazon AWS S3 buckets
and meet like as part of the pipeline, and so we just send it off to S3, and
then grabbed it from S3 in the website pipeline, and that was actually a lot
faster than the network drive thing. So doing stuff with the results from the
database, this was also tricky, and we were not lazy, but we were constrained
for time in May, and so in May, what we ended up doing is every X minutes,
however long it took to pull the database, we would just take whatever the
latest database results that were and then rebuild every single map, even
though we were using targets, where you technically don't need to do that, just
for the sake of expediency, we just told it like even if nothing changed, rebuild
all the maps, rebuild all the tables, and then rebuild the website. For November,
though, we learned or I learned how to use dynamic branching in targets, which
lets you create like individual on-the-fly targets, and so what that let
us do is take this pipeline here, if you look at the ETL pipeline at the top,
instead of just saying have any of these results changed, if so, build the whole
thing again, we were able to say if any of the precinct level results for any
candidate have changed, then only upload or update those tables or those maps, and
so it changed that top pipeline from this to this, which was intense. There's
thousands of possible targets there, but it was able to go really quickly, and
again, this let us shrink down to only a couple minutes of running the pipeline
here, and then finally, building the actual Quarto site for the May election,
we had all of those panel tab sets with like the tables and then the maps, and we
just like copied and pasted hundreds of times, just because we were trying to go
fast. For November, though, we figured out that you can dynamically generate
markdown chunks using purr, and so we were able to use these 19 lines of code
to insert each of the tables and maps into this template, and then it just ran
and generated all 500-ish elections in the whole state really, really fast, which
was magical. So that got us to finally the web developer part here, where we
have to build the site and deploy it, and we're able to do that magically
through Quarto here. Okay, really fast, the way we can sum up the web developer
part, and why we landed on Quarto, you know, we love Shiny, it would be really
fun to filter by races and stuff, but Shiny probably wouldn't scale to the
people we're talking about. We're talking about thousands of people refreshing at
once. This kept me up at night, even once we landed on Quarto, being a static page,
where that's less of a problem, and we had it hosted on Netlify, and I have to
give their engineers credit, I don't know if any of them are here, but I had emailed
with them, and I'm like, hey, here's our site, you think this thing's gonna
crash on election night? Because if it does, you know, all the stuff we've
talked about and worked hard on isn't gonna matter. We're gonna have a couple
problems on our hands. I probably wouldn't be up here speaking to you,
because I'd be dead. But, you know, so let's fast forward. It's election night,
it's nine o'clock, the polls have closed, we've built all this out, our site is
live with zeroed results, and now people are starting to hit it, because polls
have just closed, and the results are about to come in. You know, I'm
sitting in the Capitol, this is me, this is Andrew, counting down the results
coming out, and we hit the button, and the site does not crash. The results are
accurate. It ends up, November ends up being the largest election in Idaho's
history. We had almost a million ballots cast. We got a ton of credit for the
website that we had, and like any other engaged citizen, I ended up getting to
just enjoy the election results, rather than worrying about whether the site
would work or not. We will go through the Secretary of State's website. They
have these great tools. Gabe and the great team over at the Secretary of
State's office has built these maps, so we'll be able to go through the state of
Idaho, and see county to county, precinct to precinct, what areas were voting in
favor of Proposition 1. What were some of the splits like in those legislative
districts that could be swing areas. Something really, it was really cool that
they got to use our website, not the New York Times. So here's that, the QR code's
not showing on here. It's on my computer. There it is. So QR code link if you want
to check it out. You can check out the actual website, the code, and then Andrew
and I will stick around if you guys have any questions for us. Thank you.